added en blog of ambient mesh (#28)
merbridge/website: content/en/blog/2022/ambient-mesh-data-path/index.md

---
title: Deep Dive into Ambient Mesh - Traffic Path
linkTitle: Deep Dive into Ambient Mesh - Traffic Path
date: 2022-10-13
weight: 1

> description: This blog introduces the traffic path on data plane in the ambient mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: This blog analyzes the traffic path on data plane in the ambient mesh.
```

author: Kebe Liu
---

Ambient Mesh has been released for a while, and some online articles have talked much about its usage and architecture.

> This blog will deep dive into the traffic path on data plane in the ambient mesh to help you fully understand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This blog will dive into the traffic path on data plane in the ambient mesh to help you fully understand
```

the implementations of the ambient data plane.

Before start, you shall carefully read through [introducing ambient mesh](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/)

> to learn the basic knowledges of the ambient mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to learn the basic knowledge of the ambient mesh.
```

> > To provide convenience for your reading and practice, the test environment can be deployed by following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For your convenience, the test environment can be deployed by following
```

  [Get Started with Istio Ambient Mesh](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/get-started-ambient/).

## Start from the moment you make a request

In order to explore the traffic path, we first analyze the scenario where two services access each other in
the ambient mesh (only for L4 mode on different nodes).

After enabling the ambient mesh in the `default` namespace, all services will have capabilities of mesh governance.

Our analysis starts from this command: `kubectl exec deploy/sleep -- curl -s http://productpage:9080/ | head -n1`

In the sidecar mode, Istio intercepts traffic through iptables.
When you run the curl command in a sleep pod, the traffic will be forwarded by iptables to port 15001 of sidecar.

> However in the ambient mesh, no any sidecar exists in the pod, and the pod does not need to be restarted to enable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in the ambient mesh, no sidecar exists in a pod, and it does not need restart to enable
```

the ambient mesh. How to make sure the request is processed by ztunnel?

## Egress traffic interception

To learn details about intercepting the egress traffic, let's check the control plane components:

```console
kebe@pc $ kubectl -n istio-system get po
NAME                                   READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
istio-cni-node-5rh5z                   1/1     Running   0          20h
istio-cni-node-qsvsz                   1/1     Running   0          20h
istio-cni-node-wdffp                   1/1     Running   0          20h
istio-ingressgateway-5cfcb57bd-kx9hx   1/1     Running   0          20h
istiod-6b84499b75-ncmn7                1/1     Running   0          20h
ztunnel-nptf6                          1/1     Running   0          20h
ztunnel-vxv4b                          1/1     Running   0          20h
ztunnel-xkz4s                          1/1     Running   0          20h
```

In the sidecar mode, istio-cni is mainly a CNI to avoid permission leakage caused by using the istio-init container to process iptables rules.

> However, In the ambient mesh, istio-cni becomes a required component, and sidecars are theoretically not needed. Why is the istio-cni component being required?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in the ambient mesh, istio-cni becomes a required component. Sidecars are theoretically not needed. Why is the istio-cni component being required?
```

```console
root@ambient-worker2:/# iptables-save
*mangle
...
-A POSTROUTING -j ztunnel-POSTROUTING
...
-A ztunnel-PREROUTING -p tcp -m set --match-set ztunnel-pods-ips src -j MARK --set-xmark 0x100/0x100
```

You now learn that when a pod in the ambient mesh on a node (in the `ztunnel-pods-ips` ipset) initiates a request,
its connection will be marked with `0x100/0x100`.

Generally, it will be related to routing. Let's check the routing rules:

```console
root@ambient-worker2:/# ip rule
0: from all lookup local
100: from all fwmark 0x200/0x200 goto 32766
101: from all fwmark 0x100/0x100 lookup 101
102: from all fwmark 0x40/0x40 lookup 102
103: from all lookup 100
32766: from all lookup main
32767: from all lookup default
```

The traffic marked with `0x100/0x100` goes via the routing table 101. Let's check the routing table:

```console
root@ambient-worker2:/# ip r show table 101
default via 192.168.127.2 dev istioout
10.244.1.2 dev veth5db63c11 scope link
```

It can be clearly seen that the default gateway has been replaced with `192.168.127.2` via the istioout NIC (network interface card).

`192.168.127.2` does not belong to any of NodeIP, PodIP, and ClusterIP.

> The istioout NIC should not exist by default, so which created this IP?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The istioout NIC should not exist by default, then where does this IP come from?
```

    inet 192.168.127.1/30 brd 192.168.127.3 scope global istioout
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

Where is the gateway IP of `192.168.127.2`? It is allocated in ztunnel.

```console
kebe@pc $ kubectl -n istio-system exec -it ztunnel-nptf6 -- ip a
Defaulted container "istio-proxy" out of: istio-proxy, istio-init (init)
2: eth0@if3: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default
    link/ether 46:8a:46:72:1d:3b brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
    inet 10.244.2.3/24 brd 10.244.2.255 scope global eth0
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::448a:46ff:fe72:1d3b/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
4: pistioout: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1450 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/ether c2:d0:18:20:3b:97 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 192.168.127.2/30 scope global pistioout
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::c0d0:18ff:fe20:3b97/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

You can now see that the traffic is going to ztunnel, but nothing else is done to the traffic at this time,

> it is simply routed to ztunnel. How can I enable Envoy in ztunnel process the traffic?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is simply routed to ztunnel. How to make Envoy in ztunnel process the traffic?
```

    inet6 fe80::448a:46ff:fe72:1d3b/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
3: pistioin: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1450 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 7e:b2:e6:f9:a4:92 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 192.168.126.2/30 scope global pistioin
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::7cb2:e6ff:fef9:a492/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

By using the same analysis method, let's check the iptables rules:

```console
kebe@pc $ kubectl -n istio-system exec -it ztunnel-nptf6 -- iptables-save
...
-A PREROUTING -i pistioin -p tcp -m tcp --dport 15008 -j TPROXY --on-port 15008 --on-ip 127.0.0.1 --tproxy-mark 0x400/0xfff
-A PREROUTING -i pistioin -p tcp -j TPROXY --on-port 15006 --on-ip 127.0.0.1 --tproxy-mark 0x400/0xfff
...
```

If you directly access the node via PodIP + pod port, the traffic will be forwarded to port 15006 of ztunnel,
which is the port to handle the ingress traffic in Istio.

As for the traffic whose destination port is port 15008, this is the port used by ztunnel for L4 traffic tunneling.
This blog will not explain this further.

> ## Hendle traffic for Envoy itself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Handle traffic for Envoy itself
```

In the sidecar mode, Envoy and user containers run in the same network namespace.
For the traffic from user containers, you need to intercept all the traffic to
guarantee complete control of the traffic. However, is it also required in the ambient mesh?

> The answer is no, because Envoy has been isolated to other pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The answer is no, because Envoy has been isolated from other pods.
```

---
title: Deep Dive into Ambient Mesh - Traffic Path
linkTitle: Deep Dive into Ambient Mesh - Traffic Path
date: 2022-10-13
weight: 1
description: This blog introduces the traffic path on data plane in the ambient mesh.
author: Kebe Liu
---

Ambient Mesh has been released for a while, and some online articles have talked much about its usage and architecture.
This blog will deep dive into the traffic path on data plane in the ambient mesh to help you fully understand
the implementations of the ambient data plane.

Before start, you shall carefully read through [introducing ambient mesh](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/)
to learn the basic knowledges of the ambient mesh.

> > To provide convenience for your reading and practice, the test environment is deployed by following

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> To provide convenience for your reading and practice, the test environment can be deployed by following
```

the ambient mesh. How to make sure the request is processed by ztunnel?

## Egress traffic interception

To learn details about intercepting the egress traffic, let's check the control plane components:

```console
kebe@pc $ kubectl -n istio-system get po
NAME                                   READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
istio-cni-node-5rh5z                   1/1     Running   0          20h
istio-cni-node-qsvsz                   1/1     Running   0          20h
istio-cni-node-wdffp                   1/1     Running   0          20h
istio-ingressgateway-5cfcb57bd-kx9hx   1/1     Running   0          20h
istiod-6b84499b75-ncmn7                1/1     Running   0          20h
ztunnel-nptf6                          1/1     Running   0          20h
ztunnel-vxv4b                          1/1     Running   0          20h
ztunnel-xkz4s                          1/1     Running   0          20h
```

In the ambient mesh, istio-cni is a default component. In the sidecar mode, istio-cni is mainly a CNI
to avoid permission leakage caused by using the istio-init container to process iptables rules. But in the

> ambient mesh, sidecar is theoretically not needed. Why is istio-cni required?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the sidecar mode, istio-cni is mainly a CNI to avoid permission leakage caused by using the istio-init container to process iptables rules. However, In the ambient mesh, istio-cni becomes a required component, and sidecars are theoretically not needed. Why is the istio-cni component being required?
```

       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::c0d0:18ff:fe20:3b97/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

You can now see that the traffic is going to ztunnel, but nothing else is done to the traffic at this time,
it is simply routed to ztunnel. How can I enable Envoy in ztunnel process the traffic?

Let's continue to check the ztunnel configuration with many iptables rules. Let's check the specific rules in ztunnel.

```console
kebe@pc $ kubectl -n istio-system exec -it ztunnel-nptf6 -- iptables-save
Defaulted container "istio-proxy" out of: istio-proxy, istio-init (init)
...
*mangle
-A PREROUTING -i pistioout -p tcp -j TPROXY --on-port 15001 --on-ip 127.0.0.1 --tproxy-mark 0x400/0xfff
...
COMMIT
```

When traffic enters ztunnel, it will use TPROXY to transfer the traffic to port 15001 for processing,
where 15001 is the port that Envoy actually listens to and process the pod egress traffic.
As for TPROXY, you can learn relevant reference, and this blog will not repeat it further.

So when a pod is running in the ambient mesh, its egress traffic path is as follows:

1. Initiate traffic from a process in pod

> 2. The traffic flows via the node network and get tags by iptables on the node

Reviewer 3: tag -> mark

    link/ether 7e:b2:e6:f9:a4:92 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 192.168.126.2/30 scope global pistioin
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::7cb2:e6ff:fef9:a492/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

By using the same analysis method, let's check the iptables rules:

```console
kebe@pc $ kubectl -n istio-system exec -it ztunnel-nptf6 -- iptables-save
...
-A PREROUTING -i pistioin -p tcp -m tcp --dport 15008 -j TPROXY --on-port 15008 --on-ip 127.0.0.1 --tproxy-mark 0x400/0xfff
-A PREROUTING -i pistioin -p tcp -j TPROXY --on-port 15006 --on-ip 127.0.0.1 --tproxy-mark 0x400/0xfff
...
```

If you directly access the node via PodIP + pod port, the traffic will be forwarded to port 15006 of ztunnel,
which is the port to handle the ingress traffic in Istio.

As for the traffic whose destination port is port 15008, this is the port used by ztunnel for L4 traffic tunneling.
This blog will not explain this further.

## Hendle traffic for Envoy itself

In the sidecar mode, Envoy and business containers run in the same network namespace.

> For the traffic from business containers, you need to intercept all the traffic to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the traffic from user containers, you need to intercept all the traffic to
```
